[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The holistic world of healing
includes plants and herbs
channeling energy as well as
both spiritual and physical
modalities.
Healers are
multidimensional beings
who dance between the realms
of the seen and unseen.
These individuals
have the ability
to facilitate a shift in
people, offering them insight
and support, reconnecting people
with themselves and the greater
collective.
Healing the world
one person at a time,
healing from the other side.
>> In my culture in Sweden,
sweating is very common.
I can imagine in many
different parts of the world.
It's the same, the sweating
and releasing and getting
blood flowing and connecting to
these kinds of sacred spaces.
For our ancestors,
it's very common,
and it's withering away
in societies and culture.
I think that's important
that we remember
when we come back to the Earth
and that we do things together.
Sing together.
Heal together.
>> My name is Ceri, and I'm
going to be facilitating
the sweat at Harmony
tomorrow here at Shambhala.
And the sweat lodge
is an old tradition.
It's been practiced
for hundreds of years
by many, many cultures.
And the sweat lodge
that I facilitate
is linked to Native
American Indians.
What the sweat signifies is
essentially birth and rebirth.
The process for everybody
going through a sweat
is obviously different.
Each person gets
something unique to them.
It's important when
doing the sweat
that you're very clear if
you're entering as a couple
or with a loved
one that you still
sing to yourself because
the sweat is for you.
It's an individual thing.
And the transformation, the
teachings, the healings,
as I say is very
unique to each person.
Some people will cry.
Some people will laugh.
Some people might go into a
very deep form of meditation.
Others might go into a
deep form of hallucination.
It gets quite hot, especially
as each of the levels
as we add more rocks, and we
also sprinkle a lot of water
onto the rocks, which
creates a steam.
We put herbs and
incense and everything
onto it as well, which
gives a different kind
of a smell at each round.
And that process
for people unlocks
all sorts of magical evolutions
and teachings and learnings.
So when we speak to people
afterwards, they'll come out,
and they just want to
have a hug or give a hug.
A lot of times, people
are like totally
blown away by the experience.
Before going in,
especially people
that haven't done
a sweat before,
have no real expectation.
A lot of times, people
will say to me, oh,
is it like getting into a
sauna and in a way, it is.
But it's actually nature
sauna because you're going in.
You're sweating with the rocks.
You're sweating
with Mother Earth.
And you're sweating
with the animals
around you, the
sounds around you,
and the healings
are very profound.
>> Sweat lodges can be
found all around the world.
Although they hold
varying significance
depending on the culture, there
are common threads that exist.
Sweat lodges signify
and symbolize
purification and rebirth.
Through a ceremony and
used in conjunction
with other modalities
and techniques,
they promote healing
and spiritual wellness.
>> The fire pit is prepared
normally about four to five
hours in advance.
A big fire is made
obviously, all
about intention, the
wood that we use,
the heat, the preparation.
And then the rocks that we're
going to put into the fire
are dolomite rocks,
very native to the area,
with a lot of healing energy
also a lot of wisdom and truth
ancient knowledge because
the rocks have been here
for millions and
millions of years
from part of the mountains.
So we take these rocks,
we put them into the fire,
and we heat these rocks
over a number of hours.
The fire keeper is
the person who's
responsible for
managing the fire,
making sure that the rocks
are at the right temperature.
You get different
types of shaped sweats.
This particular sweat
is a dome-shaped sweat
which has been built
and constructed out
of wattle wood and willow.
And the wood is basically wet,
put into a permanent shape,
and then it's dried
in that shape.
So when you see it in
most instances, it's bare,
it's uncovered, and
it's not in ceremony.
But when we are
preparing the sweat,
and we cover the
sweat in blankets
to keep all of the
heat inside as well as
to make it as dark as possible.
And also, outside of the
door, we've got the fire pit.
So the door of the
sweat is facing the east
where the sun rises.
How's the back?
Rack up to this one.
Can't wait to sweat.
Come, come, come.
You two just get yourself
into as little clothing
comfortable as possible.
[INDISTINCT CHATTER]
>> Now, the process or the
practice of smudging, again,
being practiced for many,
many years by many spiritual
traditions and many,
many spiritual beliefs.
But essentially, we use a
variety of different things.
So it could be a smudge bundle.
It could be sage,
any natural herbs.
Also, Palo Santo which
is a sacred wood that
comes from South America.
And what we then
essentially do is
we're going to either use a
feather or dust the person
with a smoke from the smudge,
and that essentially signifies
removing any negative
energy, any dark energies,
any negative forces, and it
really just kind of clears
the person's space so that
they can then into the sweat
and be protected.
We're going to be chanting.
We're going to be talking.
We're going to be
giving stuff away.
We're going to be saying things.
Again like the firework,
this is your personal sweat.
So you're sweating for you and
for various other components,
but it's about you and your
connection to the room,
to the sweat, to Mother Earth.
If you can imagine
the sweat whilst it
looks like it's a
semi-circle from the top,
it's actually a full circle.
So as the ground
is here, so this
is the sweat that
is above the ground,
but underneath in a
perfect circle matching,
this is the sweat that
is beneath the ground.
So we're sitting within
a dome, within a sphere.
And the most important thing
is go as deep as you can.
You find as the
rounds intensify,
the heat intensifies,
and that's where you
will start to really connect.
So if you can, stay in
the whole five rounds.
That will be perfect.
Once the smudging is done, we
will then draw the spirit line.
And the spirit line is very
significant of the link
between the fire, the rocks,
and the entrance to the sweat.
So very important that
once that spirit line
has been drawn that nobody
crosses the spirit line.
Everybody is then led to
the entrance of the sweat,
and we walk around the sweat.
And then, in entering, go down
onto your hands and knees.
Put your forehead on the ground.
And then really just announce
yourself to the universe.
And at that point, you're
going to crawl into the sweat
and crawl it on
the inside and then
you're going to make
yourself comfortable.
Once everybody's
inside the sweat,
the sweat poorer--
that will be myself.
I will enter the sweat make
sure that I've got everything
that I need.
There'll be a rattle.
There'll be a big bucket of
water and a ladle or a spoon,
and we are then ready
to start the process.
At this point, I call
for the firekeeper
to bring anything between
five to seven rocks or tunkas
as we call them.
Tunka is Native
American for rock.
And we look at the
tunka as bringing
that knowledge and that
wisdom and that teaching
into the sweat with us.
Once the rocks have been brought
in, the fire keeper will leave,
and the door is
closed, and the sweat
is then put into darkness.
OK, I'm going to be
running the sweat line now.
OK, everybody, prepare
yourself and have a good sweat.
So you're going to
enter like this.
All right, whoever wants to
go first, align yourselves up.
Whoever is next?
[NON-ENGLISH CHANTING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Welcome to camp.
>> Now, there are five rounds or
levels that we go through with
the sweat.
The first round will
essentially be there
to signify the welcoming
of the ancestors,
the welcoming of the rocks,
grandfather sky, grandmother
Earth, and then also calling
in your spirit animal
who's going to then be there
as a form of protection
to guide you and support
you through your learning
and your process.
So once that round is
finished, we'll call door.
The door gets opened.
We then invite the
fire keeper to bring
another round of rocks,
and we then close the door,
and we start the second around.
The second round
will basically be
sending healing to the planet.
And the way we send
healing to the planet
is we acknowledge the
two-leggeds, that's
being the people, the
four-leggeds, being
all of our animals.
We look at the fins
being the fish,
and then the winged
being the birds.
And really, what
we're looking to do
at this point is collectively,
within the sweat,
we're sending healing
to the planet,
removing any of the
negative energy.
Once this round is finished,
we call door again.
The firekeeper will bring
another seven rocks in.
The door is closed, and we
then begin the third around.
The third round is
where we send healing
to any family members
any loved ones, obviously
with their permission.
We send them love.
We send them healing, and
then we go into that process.
And at the end of the third
round, we open the door.
We invite seven more rocks or
tunkas back into the sweat.
Once the fire keeper leaves,
and we closed the door.
We are then in the fourth
round, and the fourth round
is the round of self.
And this is the round where we
ask for healing for ourselves.
We've done all the work in
terms of healing the planet
and healing family and
friends, and now it's
about going within and
asking to either be
able to release things
that no longer serve us
or drawing and accessing and
asking for strength to give us
the support for
the things that we
need when we go
into Mother Earth
and reintegrate ourselves.
Once that round is finalized
and finished, we open the door.
We'll pass water
around for everybody
who wants water to drink.
And we then close
the door again.
We don't introduce
any new rocks.
And this is the fifth
round, and this is also
known as the silent round as
well as the ancestor round.
So this is the round
where we will now
sweat with our ancestors who've
been with us the entire time,
and it's really for them.
We want to honor them and
thank them for being present,
thank them for showing
up and thank them
for the teachings and the
lessons and the healing.
And once we're finished,
we then call door again,
and whoever wants to leave can
leave, exiting in the same way.
You get on your hands and
knees, and you would crawl out
in reverse, honoring and
respecting the sweat lodge,
putting your forehead on the
ground and giving thanks.
The exiting of the sweat
and coming back into Earth
is essentially the
same process, or it
signifies the process of exiting
the womb and being reborn.
And that is such a
significant point
because we take the
teachings and the learnings
and everything that we've
gathered from the sweat,
and we now need to be
able to bring that back
into the real world
and take it with us
and do the work that we can do.
Invite your spirit
animal to join you.
Tunkas, give her energy and
their wisdom and knowledge
to share with us.
I advise grandfather sky
and grandmother Earth Gaia
to come and join us
and sweat with us
and just connect with yourself,
bring yourself centered,
be one.
We've just completed a
one-and-a-half hour sweat
lodge.
We started just before
sunrise this morning.
The rocks were prepared at
about 2 o'clock this morning.
We made a big fire.
Had the rocks put in there,
about 30 different dolomite
rocks, which heats
up beautifully.
The rocks are only really used
once, and then after the sweat,
they aren't used again.
They are then discarded,
put back into the Earth,
giving gratitude and thanks.
There were about 12 of us
this morning that went in.
We built the spirit line, which
essentially connected the fire
to the sweat.
Everybody walked
around the outside
and then got on their
hands and knees,
put their foot down on the
ground and then crawled in.
The concept of coming
out of the sweat
is like entering or exiting
the womb and entering Earth.
And in the same way,
we are reintegrated
with Earth, reintegrated
with the planet,
and we are then
reintegrated into society.
We take our lessons and our
teachings with us into life,
and we do the best that we can.
>> I find it most
liberating and refreshing.
I'm always up on my spiritual
journey to try new things.
That was my first.
Very similar to
kind of heated yoga
but more spiritual,
maybe in a way.
Yeah, I can highly recommend it.
I've heard a lot about
it, and I have never
had the opportunity to try.
I think it's just
an important time
we're living in now is to break
barriers and try new things,
break out of our
egoistic little boxes
and embrace other
cultures, learning them.
>> It's the first time
I've tried the sweat.
What an awesome experience.
I can't explain it.
Beautiful.
I feel rejuvenated.
I feel as if I'm reborn.
>> Sweat lodge
was quite intense.
This is the second one
I'd be doing in a week,
and the first one I did was
with the same facilitators,
and the first one we did
was with 24, 25 or plus
minus coming in and out.
Sangoma.
And it was the most special and
hyper-spiritualized experience
I've ever had in my life.
The second one kind of
felt like a solidifying
of that nature, just a
feeling of understanding
that as I get birthed
out once again
covered in the natal
feces of the Earth,
I find myself
continuously asking
what is it that makes us when
we come and when we begin.
And how that beginning comes
as through the umbilical cord
that we connect to through
the Earth, and the only way
we can connect to that umbilical
cord is if we take our time,
slow down, sit down, get quiet.
Once we're quiet,
then we start singing.
And we get loud.
We get louder.
We get quiet.
We sing Yogi Bear.
We sing Twinkle
Twinkle Little Star,
and we also sing my best song.
We go deep.
We go shallow because
the water is us.
We are the water.
It's beautiful,
beautiful, unbelievable
Earth-shattering feeling.
If you haven't done it before,
I would highly recommend it.
Before you start trying
your plant medicines,
before you start
taking psychedelics,
I'd recommend that you
find experiences that are
able to use you and your body.
You and your body, first
and foremost, start there.
Then see what happens.
>> Alternative healing
is all around us,
from sweat lodges to fireworks,
hypnotherapy and reiki.
They are all a way
for us to look inward
and, if you allow it, to heal.
[MUSIC PLAYING]